In the decade leading up to the financial
crisis, there was a significant
growth in the use of credit and debit
cards as a means of transacting for goods.
Part of that is because these transaction
instruments simply became more
attractive for consumers as these
networks developed and became larger.
As more merchants were accepting credit
and debit cards, consumers enjoyed
transacting with them and the ease and
convenience associated with it.
What card networks and financial
institutions realized that they could do,
and did successfully in the decade
leading up to the crisis,
is introduce sort of new payment
instruments rather than just
the standard credit cards they
offered in the form of rewards cards.
These rewards cards encouraged
transactions by providing consumers
incentives to use these particular
instruments, things like airline miles or
cash back for
completing significant transactions.
Something we as consumers
don't spend that much time
thinking about is why exactly it is or
who exactly bears
the cost associated with the attractive
rewards that we receive.
You may think that it's financial
institutions and car networks who have to
compete for our business by
offering us attractive rewards.
And to a certain extent,
that's of course true.
But in reality, a large portion of
the credit card rewards that we receive
are actually borne by less sophisticated,
lower income consumers who
don't have access to, or who don't
transact with rewards instruments.
In the United States, there are
significant barriers to merchants' ability
to set different prices for
different consumers depending on
the kind of payment instrument they use.
When a consumer transacts with cash,
there is no processing fee
associated with that transaction.
For $100 of groceries,
your grocer receives the full $100
bill that you provide to her.
When a consumer transacts with
a credit card or a debit card,
the grocer receives only a portion,
as we've discussed,
of that total $100 as in her pocket.
And pays out a significant sum,
often on the order of $3 or more,
to financial institutions and card
networks for processing this transaction.
Of those $3,
let's say you the consumer receive
$1 in terms of rewards as cashback.
This means that for your $100 groceries,
you actually only paid something
like $99 for that transaction and
the merchant only received $97.
Yet for a cash user,
the merchant receives the full 100.
And the merchant has no ability, really,
to charge you, the card user, an extra
$3 for using a more expensive payment
instrument, for a variety of reasons.
One reason is because card networks
created actual barriers to the ability of
merchants to up-charge consumers for
more expensive means of payment.
Although merchants are allowed to
provide cash discounts to consumers for
transacting with cash,
historically it was very difficult for
them to charge higher fees for
card users or
highest fees for card users who
used expensive rewards card.
As a result of a 2013 settlement
between Visa and MasterCard and
a group of merchants, they're now
sort of technically able to surcharge
consumers who are using expensive
forms of payment for transacting.
However, in reality, there still exists
a variety of legislative barriers,
like rules in 11 states that explicitly
ban the practice of charging higher
prices to consumers for the use of
more expensive payment instruments.
This means that practically merchants
have very little ability to
charge different prices for those who
use more expensive rewards cards.
And in response what they do is simply
increase the costs of retail goods
across the board for all consumers to
cover the cost of processing fees for
the few of us who transact
with rewards cards.
Or in the very extreme,
it means that airline miles for
sort of billionaires
like Warren Buffett and
Mark Zuckerberg are being
subsidized by a cash payments and
food stamps payments by very low
income consumers amongst us.
In recent work, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston has made this point quite
explicitly and tried to quantify it.
They point out that on average,
every cash-using household pays
around $151 annually to
card-using households.
And each card-using household
receives around $1,500 from cash
users every year in the form of
a transfer through their ability to get
access to attractive rewards.
This in essence is an incredibly
regressive transfer from low
income to high income households.
The legislative fixes for this sort of
transfer are a little bit complicated and
perhaps not politically that attractive.
Sort of the most extreme solution
that we could imagine is we
could simply ban loyalty rewards
programs all together and
get rid of your airline miles or
your 2% cash back.
Perhaps a more politically
palatable solution to this
regressive transfer would be
focusing on making it easier for
merchants to charge differential
pricing to consumers who use
differentially expensive
payment instruments to process.
That way when you use your American
Express at your local grocery store,
you can make the decision of whether
the 2% extra you'll be charged in order
to cover the processing fees for that
transaction are actually outweighed by
attractive awards that
you're going to be offered.
You, the consumer that's causing the
merchant bear the extra processing fee,
are the one who has to make the decision
about whether you want to pay that extra
processing fee rather than
unfairly the processing
fee associated with your
transaction being spread
out across consumers who aren't
receiving the rewards that you are.